feat: :sparkles: guidelines for publishing (#111)
dp-next/wp1-ros: managing/publishing.qmd

    -   A publicly accessible repository on GitHub containing the detailed analytical code that generates the tables, graphs and figures included in the manuscript, as well as the full text of the manuscript, abstracts submitted to conferences and slides/posters that present the work, the synopsis and the protocol.
    -   Preprints of substantial versions of the manuscript on online preprint servers such as arXiv or medRxiv.

### General authorship practices

Authorship of DP-Next publications should reflect a substantial, direct contribution to the work presented in each paper. We aim to reflect the Vancouver Guidelines (https://www.icmje.org/icmje-recommendations.pdf) (ICMJE) for authorship, expanding on them to reflect non-traditional research contributions. Non-traditional research contributions are activities that contribute in a clear way to the creation of the publication, such as improving data quality, developing software or improving analysis code.

> Author lists and orders will be established at the stage of definition of the synopsis / analysis protocol. All who have contributed to DP-Next who also qualify for co-authorship should be given the chance to become co-author on papers relating to data that they have helped collect or analyse. The SC will help to facilitate this by keeping an up to date list of submitted synopses so that those interested in contributing to the publication and being a co-author can signal their interest. Substantial contributions are a requirement for co-authorships. All potential co-authors must be involved early in the process of preparing the publications, ideally at the stage of the synopsis submission. In addition to the named authors, all papers should by default include the group authorship of ‘on behalf of the DP-Next investigators’.

Reviewer: Should 'on behalf of the DP-Next investigatiors' be specified somehow (e.g. list in appendix or link to webpage who are we)

Author: Added this to a new issue and I will make an edit to the doc with the link to the 'who we are' page.

    -   A stable version of the protocol may also be published as a preprint on online preprint servers such as arXiv or medRxiv.

5.  Work on the data analysis. Depending on the data used, this work will take place on a local secure server or on Denmark Statistics Servers. Please follow the guides on the use of Git / Github for data analysis in these two environments, making sure that the analytical code is saved in the project's Github repository.

6.  Preparation of a conference abstract, interim / preliminary results / progress reports / presentations / slides. As the project progresses, various interim results and materials are likely to be produced. As far as possible, these should also be managed as separate 'chapters' of the project's Github repository.

7.  Preparation of the manuscript. This should also take place as a 'chapter' in the project's Github repository and should be clearly linked to the annotated detailed analytical code that generated the tables, graphs and figures included in the manuscript. Stable versions of the manuscript should be published as a preprint on online preprint servers such as arXiv or medRxiv.

> 8.  Internal approval and first submission. When a substantial version of the manuscript / a conference abstract is ready for submission, the authors should request approval for submission from the SC by filing an 'issue' in the Github wp1-management project, with reference to the publication's Github repository. This should be done at least two weeks before the intended submission date / deadline. The SC will provide their agreement /disagreement as soon as possible and within two weeks. The SC will only disagree with the submission of a paper or abstract at this stage if it is felt to be too premature, is seen as repetition of previously published work or if substantial parts of the process described in this guideline have not been followed (e.g. no Github repository, no approved synopsis, no protocol).

Reviewer: It could be a slow process if all in SC needs to approve all conference abstracts/manuscripts - at least no commets within the 2 week period should be considered as appoval. However, it is important that some have a dedicated look at this and I suggest to assign 1-2 persons in SC to this (could be taking terms)

Author: I'll make the edits to reflect this.

-   Dissemination of new results through media or outreach activities can only take place after the academic dissemination in the form of published conference abstracts or presentations. In the case of a press release issued in connection with a conference, the dissemination can be prepared ahead of time under a time embargo that coincides with the academic presentation of results.

-   Before issuing any press release or disseminating any new results from DP-Next, researchers should inform the SC.

-   For press releases the notification should occur as early as possible, and if there is less than 72 hours for approval, e-mail can be followed up with text message or phone call to the PI or other members of the SC.

-   After the dissemination activity, the researcher should send a copy or link to the final materials to the SC and report/log the activity on the relevant academic output tracking platform (e.g. Researchfish).

#### Dissemination of published results / general DP-Next dissemination

> If a dissemination activity only covers general information about DP-Next or definitively published results (i.e. not including preliminary results, preprints, conference abstracts or Github content), prior approval by the SC is not required. It is highly appreciated if the researcher keeps the SC and the relevant members of the team updated on any major dissemination activities. The researcher should still send a copy or link to the final materials to the SC and report/log the activity on the relevant academic output tracking platform (e.g. ResearchFish).

Reviewer: Can we ask people to directly report all dissemination activitites on a github template. It will be important for us to be able to list all dissemination activities in yearly reports so we probably need to be a bit more clear on how we want that reported or can we just pull activities from research fish for our report ?

Author: Elsevier is closing down Research Fish after this year, and it's not clear what system(s) will replace it. So I think you're right that we will need to keep a good list of our own. Perhaps we can incorporate this into the DP-Next template for research projects, so that authors can keep track of their projects all in one place, including publication and dissemination. I'll make a separate issue for this.

### Steering Committee

The Steering Committee consists of the following members:

-   Daniel Witte, SDCA
-   Gunnar Toft, SDCA
-   Claus Bogh Juhl, SDCO
-   Stine Byberg, SDCC
-   Nicklas Rasmussen, SDCN
-   Line Lindahl-Jacobsen, SDCS
-   Maria Skaalum SDCF
-   Marit Eika Jørgensen, SDCG

The Steering Committee meets regularly online, at least 6 times per year and communicates more frequently as required.

### Acknowledgement Statement

Any publication, dissemination or communication stemming from the DP-Next project should mention the following acknowledgment statement (version 12-03-2025):

> "The DP-Next project was funded by a Steno National Collaborative Grant from the Novo Nordisk Foundation (Grant number XXXX \[Look up and complete\]). Additional funding was obtained from all Steno Diabetes Centers. The WP3 electronic questionnaires were distributed using OPEN Research Infrastructure at Steno Diabetes Center Odense."

Reviewer: The statement on OPEN should only be included in publications involving data collected through OPEN.
Grant Number: NNF24OC0089168

> # DP-Next Publication Guidelines {#sec-publishing}

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
# Publishing guidelines {#sec-publishing}
```

Simplify it a bit.

## Introduction

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

The top-level paragraph can be treated as the implicit introduction without the need for a header (especially since it is right below the title.)

The purpose of this document is to establish an internal guideline for
publications and authorship based on the DP-Next project and related
subprojects. It also outlines the decision-making processes in relation
to publications and the responsibilities of authors and the DP-Next

> Steering Committee (SC) in facilitating an optimal publication strategy

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Steering Committee in facilitating an optimal publication strategy
```

I try to avoid abbreviations in the repo

and an honest and transparent authorship policy.

> ## DP-Next publication mindset and overall process

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Mindset and overall process
```

Since we're in the DP-Next base "URL"/GitHub, we don't need to use `DP-Next` within titles/headers.

According to the original project description to the Novo Nordisk

> Foundation (<https://dp-next.github.io/>) and the collaboration

Reviewer 2: Since this URL is undergoing a lot of changes, would it make sense to link to the original application (that could be put as a PDF, etc somewhere?)

> agreement (Section 12), DP-Next aims to work, collaborate and publish

Reviewer 2: Section 12? What and where is that?

Author: It's Section 12 of the Collaboration Agreement. This is the legal document that all the Steno Centers have signed to enter into the DP-Next project.

> agreement (Section 12), DP-Next aims to work, collaborate and publish

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
agreement (Section 12), DP-Next aims to work, collaborate, and publish
```

I use the Oxford comma in this repo ☺️

following the principles of open and reproducible science. This document

> outlines in more detail how we operationalise these principles in

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
outlines in more detail how we apply these principles,
```

Small simplification.

> practice, and has the status of guideline. In case of any discrepancy or

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
and has the status of guideline. In case of any discrepancy or
```

conflict between this guideline and the collaboration agreement, the
text of the collaboration agreement has precedence. Any substantial

> deviations from this guideline should be justified and approved by the

Reviewer 2: Who should justify this? The steering committee? I'm not sure I follow the "subject" of this sentence.

Author: The authors should justify

> SC.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Steering Committee.
```

> According to the collaboration agreement the SC is charged with

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
According to the collaboration agreement the Steering Committee is charged with
```

outlining and implementing the project's publication strategy. The main
aims of this strategy are:

> - To jointly publish positive, negative and inconclusive results in

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- To jointly publish positive, negative, and inconclusive results in
```

>   international peer-reviewed scientific journals

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  international peer-reviewed scientific journals.
```

> - To work according to open and reproducible research practices

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- To work according to open and reproducible research practices.
```

The sections below outline how these principles will be implemented in
practice; first at a general level and then including operational
details.

> ### General Open and Reproducible research practices

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Open and reproducible practices
```

- All DP-Next publications/outputs should be published as Open Access

>   publications, with a strong preference for:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
All publications/outputs should be published as Open Access
publications, with a strong preference for:
```

Convert to a paragraph so the sub-items can be a normal list (rather than a sublist), I tend to avoid sub-lists if at all possible in this repo.

>   - The Green Open Access format

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- The Green Open Access format (meaning to publish as a pre-print in an open archive such as [Zenodo](https://zenodo.org) or [bioRxiv](https://www.biorxiv.org)).
```

  - Publication agreements that do not require the transfer of copyright to publishers

>   - Publication under a Creative Commons CC-BY license.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Publication agreements that do not require the transfer of copyright to publishers.
- Publication under a Creative Commons CC-BY license.
```

> - All DP-Next publications should be accompanied by the following:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
All publications should be accompanied by the following:
```

>   - A synopsis of the proposed publication, including a defined aim/hypothesis, general methodological approach, required data, expected timeline, and proposed author list. This synopsis is only for internal use, and should be approved by the SC before any work on a specific analysis/paper starts (see below).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- A synopsis of the proposed publication, including a defined aim/hypothesis,
  general methodological approach, required data, expected timeline, and 
  proposed author list. This synopsis is only for internal use, and should be
  approved by the Steering Committee before any work on a specific analysis/paper
  starts (see below).
```

>   - A detailed analysis protocol, published on an online repository such as Zenodo or OpenAIRE to obtain a Digital Object Identifier (DOI) and clearly establish a clear temporal sequence between definition of hypotheses/analytic approaches and analysis of data.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- A detailed analysis protocol, published on an online repository such as Zenodo
  or OpenAIRE to obtain a Digital Object Identifier (DOI) and clearly establish a
  clear temporal sequence between definition of hypotheses/analytic approaches 
  and analysis of data.
```

>   - A publicly accessible repository on GitHub containing the detailed analytical code that generates the tables, graphs and figures included in the manuscript, as well as the full text of the manuscript, abstracts submitted to conferences and slides/posters that present the work, the synopsis and the protocol.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- A publicly accessible repository on GitHub containing the detailed analytical
  code that generates the tables, graphs, and figures included in the manuscript,
  as well as the full text of the manuscript, abstracts submitted to conferences
  and slides/posters that present the work, the synopsis and the protocol.
```

>   - Preprints of substantial versions of the manuscript on online preprint servers such as arXiv or medRxiv.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Preprints of substantial versions of the manuscript on online pre-print servers
  such as Zenodo, bioRxiv, arXiv, or medRxiv.
```

### General authorship practices

Authorship of DP-Next publications should reflect a substantial, direct
contribution to the work presented in each paper. We aim to reflect the
Vancouver Guidelines (<https://www.icmje.org/icmje-recommendations.pdf>)
(ICMJE) for authorship, expanding on them to reflect non-traditional
research contributions. Non-traditional research contributions are
activities that contribute in a clear way to the creation of the

> publication, such as improving data quality, developing software or

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
publication, such as improving data quality, developing software, or
```

improving analysis code.

Author lists and orders will be established at the stage of definition
of the synopsis / analysis protocol. All who have contributed to DP-Next
who also qualify for co-authorship should be given the chance to become
co-author on papers relating to data that they have helped collect or

> analyse. The SC will help to facilitate this by keeping an up to date

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
analyse. The Steering Committee will help to facilitate this by keeping an up to date
```

list of submitted synopses so that those interested in contributing to
the publication and being a co-author can signal their interest.
Substantial contributions are a requirement for co-authorships. All
potential co-authors must be involved early in the process of preparing
the publications, ideally at the stage of the synopsis submission. In
addition to the named authors, all papers should by default include the

> group authorship of ‘on behalf of the DP-Next investigators’.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
group authorship of 'on behalf of the DP-Next investigators'.
```

Author lists and orders may be amended after synopsis approval by

> consensus among the authors or by the SC if the factual contributions

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
consensus among the authors or by the Steering Committee if the factual contributions
```

differ from those foreseen initially.

If disagreements about authorship cannot be resolved by consensus within

> the author group, the SC will make a decision. Regardless of named

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
the author group, the Steering Committee will make a decision. Regardless of named
```

authors, publications will include detailed contributor lists along with

> described contributions as per the CRediT roles, either directly in the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
described contributions as per the [CRediT roles](https://credit.niso.org), either directly in the
```

paper, as a supplemental appendix, or described on an external publicly

> accessible document. The SC will ensure that such a document is publicly

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
accessible document. The Steering Committee will ensure that such a document is publicly
```

accessible and up to date. Furthermore, papers must include an
acknowledgment to external parties such as funders, institutions,

> participants and service providers that have contributed to the specific

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
participants, and service providers that have contributed to the specific
```

> work presented in each paper. The SC will maintain an updated

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
work presented in each paper. The Steering Committee will maintain an updated
```

acknowledgment statement for the DP-Next project.

## Practical implementation

> ### Initiative for publications

Reviewer 2: Could this and the section below be revised to be "initiating a research project"? When I first read this, I didn't connect "initiative" meaning "to start" (does it?), so making that clearer might help.

Maybe:

```suggestion
### Starting a research project
```

Or "proposing" would work too.

Author: Yes, that's exactly what it means:

initiative: "a new plan or process to improve something or solve a problem" (https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english/initiative)

initiate: "to cause something to begin" (https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english/initiate)

Author: Made some edits to make it all clearer

> It is expected that the initiative to propose a new publication based on

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We expect that the initiative to propose a new publication based on
```

DP-Next data will primarily be taken by investigators within the DP-Next

> team. However, DP-Next also welcomes collaborative publication

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
DP-Next data will primarily be taken by DP-Next investigators.
However, we also welcome collaborative publication
```

Small simplification.

initiatives by external investigators (i.e. those who are not part of
the DP-Next team). Publication initiatives led by external investigators

> must include at least one co-author from the DP-Next team to ensure

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
must include at least one DP-Next co-author to ensure
```

> continuity and handling and reporting according to DP-Next guidelines.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
continuity and handling and reporting according to our guidelines.
```

Publication initiatives can be stand-alone or part of a wider protocol,
such as a PhD or post-doc protocol. The same steps outlined below for
manuscripts apply if DP-Next results are to be included in a PhD thesis.

### Steps to follow during the publication life cycle

The requirements for preparing a DP-Next publication apply to both
internal and external researchers and should follow these steps:

> 1. Creation of a publicly accessible repository specifically for each

Reviewer 2: I'd suggest these steps be converted to headers rather than a list. For longer lists like this, it makes it a bit easier to read through and stylistically it looks nicer on the website if most text is centered in the content. Lists are not centered, they are slightly off-center to differentiate them from surrounding text. But let's do that after the first round of comments ☺️

Author: I'll file this as a new issue

>    publication on Github. The repository should be placed under the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   publication on Github. The repository must be placed under the
```

We can use stronger language here 😁

   DP-Next organization, be named according to the naming guide \[INSERT

>    LINK TO NAMING GUIDE\] and preferably use the Seedcase template

Reviewer 2: Ah, like a template other than for a website? Like a research project template? We could make one in DP-Next instead! I think that would fit better within the DP-Next GitHub org and aligns better with WP1's goals, rather than Seedcase's goals (which is mainly about data structuring).

Author: When I wrote it I was thinking of the Seedcase template for Github repos with website that you showed at the last tech-leads meeting. But perhaps we can make a slightly slimmer template specifically for research projects in DP-Next! Good suggestion

   \[INSERT LINK TO TEMPLATE\]. This repository will contain the various
   'sub-products' described below as separate 'chapters'.

> 2. Synopsis preparation and approval from the SC. This should take place

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. Synopsis preparation and approval from the Steering Committee. This should take place
```

   as early as possible, and should be completed before any part of the
   analysis or writing process starts. The synopsis should be brief
   (around 1 page) and be written inside the Github repository created
   under 1, according to this template \[ADD LINK TO TEMPLATE\]. It
   should contain:

   - A link to the Github repository

   - The title

   - The proposed author list, with roles

   - A clear hypothesis, with a brief background if needed

   - The required DP-Next data

   - A general outline of the analytical approach

   - A proposed timeline for the work, including proposed conference presentations and proposed target journals

   - Connection to specific DP-Next WP aims, PhD/postdoc protocols and other prior or ongoing projects

   - A table to track the status of the project with dates as it progresses through the cycle

>    Once the synopsis is completed, an approval request should be

Reviewer 2: I think the ordering here is a bit difficult for me to follow. In my mind, we would use the synopsis to create the project repository. But it seems like you wrote that the synopsis is in the repository that ... we created for them?. Could we instead have them submit an initial "this is my idea" as an issue (that has a specific template). Once we approve that, we have them create a pull request to an "archive" or "projects" or similarly named repo that lists all on-going projects (like we do in ukbAid) and fill in a template file with a fuller synopsis? That way, we can also require everyone to keep their own project details filled in within this "projects" repo, like when they submit a protocol, they must fill in the DOI details for the protocol and eventually for the other outputs, etc. And we would simply need to regularly send out reminders to the listed primary author's email to keep their details updated. What do you think?

Reviewer 2: We could also move this discussion into an issue if it takes up time to resolve/clarify. That way we don't delay this PR.

Author: This would add an extra step, but it would make it very easy to get the process started, as it would only involve filing an issue. I'll transfer this point to a separate issue.

  link to the final materials to the SC and report/log the activity on
  the relevant academic output tracking platform (e.g. Researchfish).

#### Dissemination of published results / general DP-Next dissemination

If a dissemination activity only covers general information about
DP-Next or definitively published results (i.e. not including
preliminary results, preprints, conference abstracts or Github content),
prior approval by the SC is not required. It is highly appreciated if
the researcher keeps the SC and the relevant members of the team updated
on any major dissemination activities. The researcher should still send
a copy or link to the final materials to the SC and report/log the
activity on the relevant academic output tracking platform (e.g.
ResearchFish).

### Steering Committee

The Steering Committee consists of the following members:

- Daniel Witte, SDCA
- Gunnar Toft, SDCA
- Clause Bogh Juhl, SDCO
- Stine Byberg, SDCC
- Nicklas Rasmussen, SDCN
- Line Lindahl-Jacobsen, SDCS
- Maria Skaalum SDCF
- Marit Eika Jørgensen, SDCG

The Steering Committee meets regularly online, at least 6 times per year

> and communicates more frequently as required.

Reviewer 2: This could be moved to an appendix or moved into the main website (which could be on the "who we are" page).

Author: I have moved this list to the 'Who we are' page on the website and filed a PR

# Publishing guidelines {#sec-publishing}

The purpose of this document is to establish an internal guideline for
publications and authorship based on the DP-Next project and related
subprojects. It also outlines the decision-making processes in relation
to publications and the responsibilities of authors and the DP-Next
Steering Committee in facilitating an optimal publication strategy
and an honest and transparent authorship policy.

## Mindset and overall process

According to the original project description to the Novo Nordisk
Foundation (<https://dp-next.github.io/>) and the collaboration
agreement (Section 12), DP-Next aims to work, collaborate, and publish
following the principles of open and reproducible science. This document
outlines in more detail how we apply these principles,
and has the status of guideline. In case of any discrepancy or
conflict between this guideline and the collaboration agreement, the

> text of the collaboration agreement has precedence. Any substantial

Author: ```suggestion
text of the collaboration agreement has precedence. If there are any substantial deviations from this guideline due to external/unforeseen circumstances, the authors should request approval to proceed from the Steering Committee, justifying the deviations.
```

> deviations from this guideline should be justified and approved by the

Author: ```suggestion

```

> Steering Committee.

Author: ```suggestion

```
